Specification of light-mode (#3118)
input-output-hk/cardano-wallet: specifications/wallet/spec-light-mode.md

# Specification: Light mode for cardano-wallet

9th Feb 2022

Status: DRAFT

# Synopsis

This document specifies a light-mode for `cardano-wallet`.

> This mode aims to make synchronisation to the blockchain faster by using a less trusted source for blockchain data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This mode aims to make synchronisation to the blockchain faster by trusting an off-chain source of aggregated blockchain data.
```

Light wallets often employ this strategy of using a less trusted data source; for example the [Nami][] wallet uses [Blockfrost][] as data source. The purpose of the light-mode of `cardano-wallet` is to make this "trust vs speed" trade-off readily available to downstream software such as [Daedalus][] with *minimal* changes to its downstream API.

In addition, the "trust versus speed" trade-off will be partially obsoleted by [Mithril][] technology, which aims to give us "trust *and* speed" by providing verified ledger state data as opposed to block data. The act of implementing light-mode in `cardano-wallet` does not only offer immediate benefits, but will, in fact, partially prepare the codebase for Mithril technology.

  [daedalus]: https://daedaluswallet.io
  [nami]: https://namiwallet.io
  [blockfrost]: http://blockfrost.io
  [mithril]: https://iohk.io/en/research/library/papers/mithrilstake-based-threshold-multisignatures/

# Motivation

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps something like these:

1. Allow users to operate their wallet without needing to wait for the node to download and validate the entire blockchain.
2. Allow users to run cardano-wallet and Daedalus on systems with 8GB of memory and <= 10GB of disk space.
3. Allow users to control where they sit on the trust vs convenience spectrum, depending upon their current circumstances.

* *Compatiblity*. Light-mode is intended to preserve the API presented to downstream software such as [Daedalus][], only *minimal* changes are expected.
* *Optionality*. A wallet that was started in light-mode can be restarted in full mode without resynchronization, and vice versa. (MVP: no support yet for changing the mode dynamically while the wallet is running.)

## Limitations

* *Trust*. The external data source does *not* provide the same level of protection against *omission* of transactions as the Proof-of-Stake consensus protocol.
* *Privacy*. In addition to the reduction of trust in the blockchain data, we now also reveal private information about addresses belonging to a single wallet.
* *Address schemes*. Only *Shelley* wallets with *sequential address discovery* can be supported.

However, these limitations are shared by all existing light wallets. In fact, some light wallets only provide *single-address* wallets, which is an additional reduction of privacy.

# Specification

> 

Reviewer: This would be a good place to describe the address+transaction discovery loop.

## Functionality

### Command line

The `cardano-wallet` executable will feature a new flag `--light` which indicates that the executable is to be started in light-mode:

```
$ cardano-wallet serve --light CRED
```

* `CRED` specifies how to connect to the less trusted blockchain data source. (MVP: Use [Blockfrost][]; `CRED` is a filepath to the secret token.)
* The `--light` argument and the `--node-socket` arguments are mutally exclusive with each other.

### REST API

When the executable was started in light-mode:

> * The endpoints in the hierarchy `/v2/byron-wallets/*` MUST return an error.

Reviewer: There should be an explanation somewhere of why this is.
"... Because byron wallets use random derivation indices, they are significantly more challenging to make a light wallet for."

However we do have options should a byron light wallet really be desired:
1. Develop a third-party byron address discovery service which takes a byron root XPub and sends back a list of addresses belonging to that wallet. (May not be a great idea security-wise).
2. For existing byron wallets in Daedalus, their wallet database contains addresses generated/discovered so far. Without the node running, we can use these addresses for light wallet transaction searching. So the light wallet balance would be up-to-date, as long as no new addresses have been generated/used since that wallet was last fully synced.

> * The endpoints in the hierarchy `/v2/shared-wallets/*` MAY return an error.

Reviewer: I think we should state that we intend to support light shared wallets, but it would not be implemented in the very first iteration.

* New data type

    ```haskell
    data BlockSummary m = BlockSummary
        { from  :: ChainPoint
        , to    :: ChainPoint
        , query :: Address -> m [Transaction]
        }
    ```

    * consumed by `applyBlocks`. Adapt `discoverTransactions` from the prototype.
    * produced by `NetworkLayer`. Adapt `lightSync` from the prototype.
    * Idea: Use an additional GADT wrapper to specialize `applyBlocks` to sequential address states:
    
        ```haskell
            data BlockData m s where
                List
                    :: NonEmpty Block
                    -> BlockData m s
                Summary
                    :: BlockSummary m
                    -> BlockData m (SeqState n k)
        ```
        
        By using this type as argument to `applyBlocks`, we are guaranteed that `BlockSummary` is only used in conjunction with sequential state. Caveat: It would be better if we could avoid parametrizing the `NetworkLayer` type with the address discovery state `s`.

## Quality assurance

### Benchmarks

> * Compare restoration times for an empty wallet in node-mode and in light-mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Compare restoration times for an empty wallet in node-mode and in light-mode.
```
```suggestion
* Compare restoration times for an empty wallet in node-mode and in light-mode.
  The existing nightly wallet restoration benchmark can be updated for this purpose.
```

> * Number of requests that we make to the data source needs to be monitored / kept in check.

Reviewer: Perhaps add: "Of interest is whether the number of requests scales linearly with the number of transactions × number of addresses."

  [daedalus]: https://daedaluswallet.io
  [nami]: https://namiwallet.io
  [blockfrost]: http://blockfrost.io
  [mithril]: https://iohk.io/en/research/library/papers/mithrilstake-based-threshold-multisignatures/

# Motivation

## Background

As the Cardano blockchain grows in size, retrieving and verifying blocks from the consensus network becomes increasingly time consuming. By making a "trust versus speed" trade-off, we can significantly decrease synchronization times.

## User-visible benefits

* Allow users to operate their wallet without needing to wait for the node to download and validate the entire blockchain.
* Allow users to run cardano-wallet and Daedalus on systems with significantly less than 8GB of memory and less than 10GB of disk space.
* Allow users to control where they sit on the trust vs convenience spectrum, depending upon their current circumstances.

## Technical benefits

> * *Speed*. With light-mode, we expect synchronisation times of < 1 minute for a wallet with 1'000 transactions. In contrast, synchronisation of an empty wallet currently takes ~ 50 minutes by connecting to a node.

Reviewer: It takes 50 minutes to sync an empty wallet -- assuming that the node has itself synced to the chain tip and built its ledger state, which itself takes hours.

* *Address schemes*. Only *Shelley* wallets with *sequential address discovery* can be supported.

However, these limitations are shared by all existing light wallets. In fact, some light wallets only provide *single-address* wallets, which is an additional reduction of privacy.

# Specification

## Overview

The implementation of light-mode is based on an efficient query `Address -> Transactions` which the blockchain data source provides. This query is useful to wallets that use *sequential address discovery* (Shelley wallets). These wallets work with a sequence of potential addresses `addr_0`, `addr_1`, `addr_2`, …. For each integer `n`, there is a deterministic procedure for generating the corresponding address `addr_n`. The wallet generates the first few addresses in this sequence and uses the above query to retrieve the corresponding transactions. When no transactions are found for `g` ("address gap") many consecutive addresses, the procedure stops — as the wallet never puts addresses with higher indices on the chain. In other words, this iterative loop yields all transactions that belong to the wallet.

> 

Reviewer: I wouldn't normally indulge in unnecessary pictures, but for this case, could we please have a simple flow chart showing the address+tx discovery loop?

This procedure is implemented and demonstrated in the `light-mode-test` prototype.

## Functionality

> 

Reviewer: And here is another gratuitous picture opportunity.
Could we please have two block diagrams - full-node and light-mode?
Like a cut-down version of the diagram here: https://input-output-hk.github.io/cardano-wallet/developers/Architecture
In the "full-node" version, wallet links to node in 4 ways: chainsync, localblockfetch, localstatequery, localtxsubmission.
In the "light-mode" version, wallet requests a list of transactions by address from the block service.

Author: Ok!

Note: We do not use `BlockFetch`, but `ChainSync` to receive the blocks from the node. This is line with the network specification, which recommends that

> The (full)-node to client protocol uses an instance of the chain synchronisation protocol that transfers full blocks, while the node-to-node instance only transfers block headers. In the node-to-node case, the block fetch protocol (Section 3.8) is used to transfer full blocks.

* New data type

    ```haskell
    data BlockSummary m = BlockSummary
        { from  :: ChainPoint
        , to    :: ChainPoint
        , query :: Address -> m [Transaction]
        }
    ```

    * consumed by `applyBlocks`. Adapt `discoverTransactions` from the prototype.
    * produced by `NetworkLayer`. Adapt `lightSync` from the prototype.
    * Idea: Use an additional GADT wrapper to specialize `applyBlocks` to sequential address states:
    
        ```haskell
            data BlockData m s where
                List
                    :: NonEmpty Block
                    -> BlockData m s
                Summary
                    :: BlockSummary m
                    -> BlockData m (SeqState n k)
        ```
        
        By using this type as argument to `applyBlocks`, we are guaranteed that `BlockSummary` is only used in conjunction with sequential state. Caveat: It would be better if we could avoid parametrizing the `NetworkLayer` type with the address discovery state `s`.

> 

Reviewer: One more thing that we should mention.
Rather than using LocalTxSubmission on cardano-node, we will be asking a web service to submit our transactions.
An example of such a thing is `cardano-submit-api`.
We assume this web service will be operated and paid for by someone.

### Testing

* Mock implementation of `LightLayer`.
    * We probably won't get good value / work out of implementing a `LightLayer` that interacts with the local cluster. One could look into implementing the light-mode `NetworkLayer` in terms of the node-mode `NetworkLayer`, though.
* Property tests for `applyBlocks` using `BlockSummary`
    * Implement a conversion function `summarize :: NonEmpty Block -> BlockSummary Identity`
    * Create a list of blocks, apply `applyBlocks` to both the list directly, and to the result of `summarize` — the results should be equal.

## External

* [Cardano-launcher][] will have to be modified to not launch the `cardano-node` process when the cardano-wallet is launched in light-mode.
* Provision of the data source is outside the scope of light-mode. We use [Blockfrost][] for demonstration purposes in the MVP.

  [cardano-launcher]: https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-launcher

# Design alternatives

## Byron wallets

> Byron wallets cannot be supported by the light-mode as described above, as it is based on an efficient query `Address -> Transactions` which Byron wallets cannot take advantage of. For these wallets, alternative designs would have to be explored Possibilities include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Byron wallets cannot be supported by the light-mode as described above, as it is based on an efficient query `Address -> Transactions` which Byron wallets cannot take advantage of. For these wallets, alternative designs would have to be explored. Possibilities include:
```
